This fundamental subject of Natural Selection will be treated at some length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see
how Natural Selection almost inevitably causes much Extinction of the less improved forms of life, and leads to what I
have called Divergence of Character. In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws of variation
and of correlation of growth. In the four succeeding chapters, the most apparent and gravest difficulties on the theory
will be given: namely, first, the difficulties of transitions, or in understanding how a simple being or a simple organ
can be changed and perfected into a highly developed being or elaborately constructed organ; secondly, the subject of Instinct,
or the mental powers of animals; thirdly, Hybridism, or the infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when intercrossed;
and fourthly, the imperfection of the Geological Record. In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of organic beings throughout time;
in the eleventh and twelfth, their geographical distribution throughout space; in the thirteenth, their classification or mutual affinities,
both when mature and in an embryonic condition. In the last chapter I shall give a brief recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.
No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in regard to the origin of species and varieties,
if he makes due allowance for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of all the beings which live around us.
Who can explain why one species ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has a narrow range and is rare?
Yet these relations are of the highest importance, for they determine the present welfare, and, as I believe, the future
success and modification of every inhabitant of this world. Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable
inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its history. Although much remains obscure, and will
long remain obscure, I can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and dispassionate judgment of which I am
capable, that the view which most naturalists entertain, and which I formerly entertained— namely, that each species has
been independently created— is erroneous. I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but that those belonging
to what are called the same genera are lineal descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same manner
as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that
Natural Selection has been the main but not exclusive means of modification. WHEN we look to the individuals of the same
variety or sub-variety of our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which strikes us, is, that they
generally differ more from each other than do the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. When we
reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages
under the most different climates and treatment, I think we are driven to conclude that this great variability is simply
due to our domestic productions having been raised under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat different from,
those to which the parent-species have been exposed under nature. There is also, I think, some probability in the view
propounded by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be partly connected with excess of food. It seems pretty clear
that organic beings must be exposed during several generations to the new conditions of life to cause any appreciable
amount of variation; and that when the organisation has once begun to vary, it generally continues to vary for many generations.